## Mean Position
The point at which the restoring force on the particle is zero and potential energy is minimum, is known as its mean position.
## Restoring Force
The force acting on the particle which tends to bring the particle toward its mean position, is know as restoring force.
This force is always directed towards the mean position.
Restoring Force always acts in a direction opposite to that of displacement. Displacement is measured from the mean position.
It is given by $F=-kx$ and has dimension $MLT^{-2}$

## Amplitude 
The maximum displacement of particle from mean position is defines as amplitude 
$$A = x_{max}- x_{mean}$$

## Time Period (T)
The time after which particle keeps on repeating its motion is known as time period.
It is given by $$T=\frac{2\pi}{\omega},\quad T = \frac{1}{f}$$ 
Where,
- $\omega$ is angular frequency and $f$ is frequency.

## Types of S.H.M
1. **Linear S.H.M**
When a particle moves to and from about a fixed point (called equilibrium position) along a straight line then its motion is called liner simple harmonic motion.

2. **Angular S.H.M**
When as system oscillates angularly with respect to a fixed axis then its motion is called angular simple harmonic motion.

## Necessary Condition to execute S.H.M
Motion of particle should be oscillatory 

Total mechanical energy of particle should be conserved (Kinetic energy + Potential energy = Constant)

Extreme position should be well defined.

**In linear S.H.M:-**
Restoring Force is directly proportional to $-x$
$$F_{r} =-kx$$
Where,
- $k$ is the proportionality constant 

Put the Value of acceleration (a), we got Equation of Linear SHM
$$m \frac{d^2x}{dt^2}+kx = 0$$
$$\frac{d^2x}{dt^2}+\frac{k}{m}x=0$$

**In Angular SHM:-**
---
Restoring [Torque](../Rotation/Torque.md) is directly proportional to $-\theta$

Equation of Angular SHM is,
$$\frac{d^2\theta}{dt^2}+\omega^2\theta = 0$$
