## 1. Introduction
The main objective of the study of the mechanics of material is to provide the future engineer with the means of analyzing and designing various machines and load-bearing structures.
Both the analysis and the design of a given structure involve the determination of *stresses* and deformations. This first chapter is devoted to the concept of stress.
Sec-2 is devoted to a short review of the basic methods of statics and to their application to the determination of the forces in the members of a simple structure consisting of pin-connected members. Section-3 will introduce you to the concept of *stress* in a member of a structure, and you will be shown how that stress can be determined from the *force* in the member. After a short discussion of engineering analysis and design (Sec-4), you will consider successively the *normal stresses* in a member under axial loading (Sec-5), *the shearing stresses* caused by the application of equal and opposite transverse forces (Sec-6), and the *bearing stresses* created by bolts and pins in the members they connect (Sec-7). These various concept will be applied in Sec-8 to the determination of the stresses in the members of the simple structure considered earlier in Sec-2.
The first part of the chapter ends with a description of the method you should use in the solution of an assigned problem (Sec-9) and with a discussion of the numerical accuracy appropriate in engineering calculations (Sec-10).
In Sec-11, where a two force members under axial loading is considered again, it will be observed that the stresses on an *oblique* plane include both *normal and shearing stresses*, while in Sec-12 you will note that *six components* are required to describe the state of stress at a point in a body under the most general loading conditions.
Finally, Sec-13 will be devoted to the determination from test specimens of the *ultimate strength* of a given material and to the use of a *factor of safety* in the computation of the allowable load for a structure component made of that material.

## 2. A Short Review of the Methods of Statics 
In this section you will review the basic methods of statics while determining the forces in the members of a simple structure.
Consider the structure shown in Figure-1, which was designed to support a 30-kN load. It consists of a boom *AB* with a $30 \times 50$ -mm rectangular cross section and of a rod *BC* with a 20-mm-diameter circular cross section. The boom and the rod are connected by a pin at *B* and are supported by pins and brackets at *A* and *C*, respectively. Out first step should be to draw a *free-body* diagram of the structure by detaching it from its support at *A* and *C*, and showing the reactions that these supports exert on the structure (Fig-2). Note that *AB* and *BC* are *two-force members*. For those of you who have not, we will pursue out analysis, ignoring that fact and assuming that the directions of the reactions at *A* and *C* are unknown. Each of these reactions therefore, will be represented by two components, $A_{x}$ and $A_{y}$ at *A*, and $C_{y}$ at *C*. We write the following three equilibrium equations:

