---
aliases:
  - Electric Charges
  - Coulomb's law
CssClasses: list-cards

---

## 1. Electric Charge
Electricity appeared to its early investigators as an extraordinary phenomenon. To draw from bodies the "subtle fire," as it was sometimes called, to bring an object into a highly electrified state, to produce a steady flow of current, called for skillful contrivance. Except for the spectacle of lightning, the ordinary manifestations of nature, from the freezing of water to the growth of a tree, seemed to have no relation to the curious behavior of electrified objects. We know now that electrical forces largely determine the physical and chemical properties of matter over the whole range from atom to living cell. For this understanding we have to thank the scientists of the nineteenth century, Ampere, Faraday, Maxwell, and many other, who discovered the nature of electromagnetism, as well as the physicists and chemists of the twentieth century who unraveled the atomic structure of matter. 
Classical electromagnetism deals with electric charges and currents and their interactions as if all the quantities involved could be measured independently, with unlimited precision. Here classical means simply "nonquantum". The quantum law with its constant *h* is ignored in the classical theory of electromagnetism, just as its is in ordinary mechanics. Indeed, the classical theory was bought very nearly to its present state of completion before Planck's discovery of quantum effects in 1900. It has survived remarkably well. Neither the revolution of quantum physics non the development of special relativity dimmed the luster of the electromagnetic field equations Maxwell wrote down 150 year ago.
Of course the theory was solidly based on experiment, and because coils, capacitors, oscillating current, and eventually radio wave and light waves. But even so great a success does not guarantee validity in another domain, for instance, the inside of a molecule.
Two facts helps to explain the continuing importance in modern physics of the classical description of electromagnetism. First, special relativity *grew out* of classical electromagnetism theory and experiments inspired by it. Maxwell's field equations, developed long before the work of Lorentz and Einstein, proved to be entirely compatible with relativity. Second, quantum modification of the electromagnetic forces have turned out to be unimportant down to distances less than $10^{-12}$ meters, 100 times smaller than the atom using the same laws that apply to the leaves of an electroscope, although we need quantum mechanics to predict how the particles will behave under those forces. For still smaller distances, a fusion of electromagnetic theory and quantum theory, called *quantum electrodynamics*, has been remarkable successful. Its predictions are confirmed by experiment down to the smallest distances yet explored.
It is assumed the reader some acquaintance with the elementary facts of electricity. We are not going to review  all the experiments by which the existence of electric charge was demonstrated, nor shall we review all the evident for the electrical constitution of matter. On the other hand, we do want to look carefully at the experimental foundations of the basic laws on which all else depends. In this chapter we shall study the physics of stationary electric charges - *electrostatics.*
Certainly one fundamental property of electric charge is its existence in the two varieties that were long ago named *positive* and *negative*.
The observed fact is that all charged particles can be divided into two classes such that all members of one class repel each other, while attracting members of other class, if two small electrically charged bodies A and B, some distance apart, attract one another and if A and attracts some third electrified body C, then we always find the *B* repels *C*. Contrast this with two kinds of handedness. Indeed, in the physics of elementary particles, questions involving the sign of the charge are sometimes linked to a question of handedness, and to another  basic symmetry, the relation of a sequence of events, *a* then *b*, then *c*, to the temporally reversed sequence *c*, then *b*, then *a*. It is only the duality of electric charge that concerns us here. For every kind of particle in nature, as far as we know, there can exist an *antiparticle*, a sort of electrical "mirror image.". The antiparticle carries  charge of the opposite sign, If any other intrinsic quality of the particles has an opposite, the antiparticle has that too, whereas in a property that admits no opposite, such as mass, the antiparticle and particles are exactly alike.
The electron's charge is negative; its antiparticle, called a positron, has a positive charge, but its mass is precisely the same as that of the electron. The proton's antiparticle is called simply antiproton; its electric charge is negative. An electron and a proton combine to make an ordinary hydrogen atom. A positron and an antiproton could  combine in the same way to make an atom of antihydrogen. Given  the building blocks, positron, antiproton, and antineutrons, there could be built up the whole range antimatter, from antihydrogen to antigalaxies. There is a practical difficulty, of course. Should a positron meet an electron or an antiproton meet a proton, that pair of particles will quickly vanish in a burst of radiation. It is therefore not surprising that even positrons and antiprotons, not to speak of antiatoms, are exceedingly rare and short-lived in our world. Perhaps the universe contains, somewhere, a vast concentration of antimatter. If so, its whereabouts is a cosmological mystery.
The universe around us consists overwhelmingly of matter, not antimatter. That is to say, the abundant carries of positive charge are protons. The proton is nearly 2000 times heavier than the electron, and very different, too, in some other respects. Thus matter at the atomic nucleus, bound within a massive structure no more than $10^{-14}$ m in size, while the negative charge is spread, in effect, through a region about $10^4$ times larger in dimensions. It is hard to imagine what atoms and molecule -- and all of chemistry -- would be like, if not for this fundamental electrical asymmetry of matter.
What we call negative charge, be the way, could  just as well have been called positive. The name was a historical accident. There is nothing essentially negative about the charge of an electron. It is not like a negative integer. A negative integer, once multiplication has been defined differs essentially from a positive integer in that its square is an integer of opposite sign. But the product of two charges is not a charge; there is no comparison.
Two other properties of electric charge as essential in the electrical structure of matter : charge is *quantized.* These properties involve *quantity* of charge and thus imply a measurement of charge. Presently we shall state Precisely how charge can be measured in terms of the force between charges a certain distance apart, and so on.
But let us take this for grate for the time being, so that we may talk freely about these fundamental facts.

## 2. Conservation of charges 

## 3. Quantization of Charge 
The electric charges we find in nature come in units of one magnitude only, equal to the amount of charge carried by a single electron. We donate the magnitude of that charge by $e$. (When we are paying attention to sign, we write -- $e$ for the charge on the electron itself.) We have already noted that the positron carries precisely that amount of charge, as it must if charge is to be conserved when an electron and a positron annihilate, leaving nothing but light. What seems more remarkable is the apparently exact equality of the charges carried by all other charged particles -- the equality, for instance, of the positive charge on the proton and the negative charge on the electron.
 That particular equality is easy to test experimentally. We can see whether the net electric charge carried by a hydrogen molecule, which consists of two protons and two electrons, is zero. In a experiment carried out by J.G. King, hydrogen gas was compressed into a tank that was electrically insulated from its surroundings. The tank contained about $5.10^{24}$ molecules (approximately 17 grams) of hydrogen. The gas was then allowed to escape by means that prevented the escape of any ion -- a molecule with an electron missing or an extra electron attached.